Orleans transactions (#32227)
dotnet/docs: docs/orleans/grains/transactions.md

﻿---
title: Transactions in Orleans
description: Learn how to use transactions in .NET Orleans.
ms.date: 10/26/2022
---

# Orleans transactions

Orleans supports distributed ACID transactions against persistent grain state. Transactions are implemented using the [Microsoft.Orleans.Transactions](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Orleans.Transactions) NuGet package. The source code for the sample app in this article is comprised of four projects:

- **_Abstractions_**: A class library containing the grain interfaces and shared classes.
- **_Grains_**: A class library containing the grain implementations.
- **_Server_**: A console app that consumes the abstractions and grains class libraries and acts as the Orleans silo.
- **_Client_**: A console app that consumes the abstractions class library that represents the Orleans client.

## Setup

> Orleans transactions are opt-in. A silo and client both must be configured to use transactions. If it isn't configured, any calls to transactional methods on a grain implementation will receive the <xref:Orleans.Transactions.OrleansTransactionsDisabledException>. To enable transactions on a silo, call <xref:Orleans.Hosting.SiloBuilderExtensions.UseTransactions%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> on the silo host builder:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orleans transactions are opt-in. A silo and client both must be configured to use transactions. If they aren't configured, any calls to transactional methods on a grain implementation will receive the <xref:Orleans.Transactions.OrleansTransactionsDisabledException>. To enable transactions on a silo, call <xref:Orleans.Hosting.SiloBuilderExtensions.UseTransactions%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> on the silo host builder:
```

    UseOrleans((context, siloBuilder) =>
    {
        siloBuilder.UseTransactions();
    });
```

Likewise, to enable transactions on the client, call `UseTransactions` <!-- <xref:Orleans.Hosting.ClientBuilderExtensions.UseTransactions%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> --> on the client host builder:

```csharp
var builder = Host.CreateDefaultBuilder(args)
    UseOrleansClient((context, clientBuilder) =>
    {
        clientBuilder.UseTransactions();
    });
```

### Transactional state storage

To use transactions, you need to configure a data store. To support various data stores with transactions, the storage abstraction <xref:Orleans.Transactions.Abstractions.ITransactionalStateStorage%601> is used. This abstraction is specific to the needs of transactions, unlike generic grain storage (<xref:Orleans.Storage.IGrainStorage>). To use transaction-specific storage, configure the silo using any implementation of `ITransactionalStateStorage`, such as Azure (<xref:Orleans.Hosting.AzureTableSiloBuilderExtensions.AddAzureTableTransactionalStateStorage%2A>).

For example, consider the following host builder configuration:

:::code source="snippets/transactions/Server/Program.cs":::

> For development purposes, if transaction-specific storage is not available for the datastore you need, an `IGrainStorage` implementation may be used instead. For any transactional state that doesn't have a store configured, transactions will attempt to fail over to the grain storage using a bridge. Accessing a transactional state via a bridge to grain storage will be less efficient and isn't a pattern we intend to support long-term, hence the recommendation is to only use this for development purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For development purposes, if transaction-specific storage is not available for the datastore you need, you can use an `IGrainStorage` implementation instead. For any transactional state that doesn't have a store configured, transactions will attempt to fail over to the grain storage using a bridge. Accessing a transactional state via a bridge to grain storage is less efficient and may not be supported in the future. Hence, the recommendation is to only use this for development purposes.
```

}
```

> All read or write access to the persisted state must be performed via synchronous functions passed to the transactional state facet. This allows the transaction system to perform or cancel these operations transactionally. To use a transactional state within a grain, you define a serializable state class to be persisted and to declare the transactional state in the grain's constructor with a <xref:Orleans.Transactions.Abstractions.TransactionalStateAttribute>. The latter declares the state name and (optionally) which transactional state storage to use, for more information see [Setup](#setup).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All read or write access to the persisted state must be performed via synchronous functions passed to the transactional state facet. This allows the transaction system to perform or cancel these operations transactionally. To use a transactional state within a grain, you define a serializable state class to be persisted and declare the transactional state in the grain's constructor with a <xref:Orleans.Transactions.Abstractions.TransactionalStateAttribute>. The latter declares the state name and, optionally, which transactional state storage to use. For more information, see [Setup](#setup).
```

}
```

As an example, the `Balance` state object is defined as follows:

:::code source="snippets/transactions/Abstractions/Balance.cs":::

The preceding state object:

- Is decorated with the <xref:Orleans.CodeGeneration.GenerateSerializerAttribute> to instruct the Orleans code generator to generate a serializer.

> - `Value` property is decorated with the `IdAttribute` to uniquely identify the member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Has a `Value` property that's decorated with the `IdAttribute` to uniquely identify the member.
```

## Call transaction methods from a client

The recommended way to call a transaction grain method is to use the `ITransactionClient`. The `ITransactionClient` is automatically registered with the dependency injection service provider when the Orleans client is configured. The `ITransactionClient` is used to create a transaction context and to call transactional grain methods within that context. The following example shows how to use the `ITransactionClient` to call transactional grain methods.

:::code source="snippets/transactions/Client/Program.cs" highlight="11-12,30-31,38-44":::

In the preceding client code:

- The `IHostBuilder` is configured with `UseOrleansClient`.
  - The `IClientBuilder` uses localhost clustering and transactions.
- The `IClusterClient` and `ITransactionClient` interfaces are retrieved from the service provider.
- The `from` and `to` variables are assigned their `IAccountGrain` references.
- The `ITransactionClient` is used to create a transaction, calling:
  - `Withdraw` on the `from` account grain reference.

>   - And `Deposit` on the `to` account grain reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `Deposit` on the `to` account grain reference.
```

## Call transaction methods from another grain

Transactional methods on a grain interface are called like any other grain method. As an alternative approach using the `ITransactionClient`, the `AtmGrain` implementation below calls the `Transfer` method (which is transactional) on the `IAccountGrain` interface.

Consider the `AtmGrain` implementation, which resolves the two referenced account grains and makes the appropriate calls to `Withdraw` and `Deposit`:

:::code source="snippets/transactions/Grains/AtmGrain.cs":::

Your client app code can call `AtmGrain.Transfer` in a transactional manner as follows:

```csharp
IAtmGrain atmOne = client.GetGrain<IAtmGrain>(0);

Guid from = Guid.NewGuid();
Guid to = Guid.NewGuid();

await atmOne.Transfer(from, to, 100);

uint fromBalance = await client.GetGrain<IAccountGrain>(from).GetBalance();
uint toBalance = await client.GetGrain<IAccountGrain>(to).GetBalance();
```

> In the above calls, an `IAtmGrain` is used to transfer 100 units of currency from one account to another. After the transfer is complete, both accounts are queried to get their current balance. The currency transfer, as well as both account queries, are performed as ACID transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the preceding calls, an `IAtmGrain` is used to transfer 100 units of currency from one account to another. After the transfer is complete, both accounts are queried to get their current balance. The currency transfer, as well as both account queries, are performed as ACID transactions.
```

> As shown in the preceding example, transactions can return values within a `Task`, like other grain calls, but upon call failure, they will not throw application exceptions, but rather an <xref:Orleans.Transactions.OrleansTransactionException> or <xref:System.TimeoutException>. If the application throws an exception during the transaction and that exception causes the transaction to fail (as opposed to failing because of other system failures), the application exception will be the inner exception of the `OrleansTransactionException`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in the preceding example, transactions can return values within a `Task`, like other grain calls. But upon call failure, they will not throw application exceptions but rather an <xref:Orleans.Transactions.OrleansTransactionException> or <xref:System.TimeoutException>. If the application throws an exception during the transaction and that exception causes the transaction to fail (as opposed to failing because of other system failures), the application exception will be the inner exception of the `OrleansTransactionException`.
```
